---
title: "PMPM Calculations - Part 1 of 3"
author: "Alexis Guinebertiere"
layout: post
date: 2018-12-07
draft: true
tags: ["Calculations", "PMPM", "Payers"]
categories: ["Technical"]
---

Per-member per-month (PMPM) calculations are key for healthcare payers. Say that, in a given month, your total payout is $10M in claims and you had 1M members in your plan. Your monthly insurance premium has to be at least $100M / 1M = $100 for you to cover your claim expenses. Add your other costs and you have an indication of what your premiums should be.

PMPM calculations are a way to observe trends, as well as slice and dice healthcare numbers. They allow for a fair comparison across different populations (e.g. the 0-20 year olds vs the 21+ year olds, or the West coast population vs the South population). They can also help identify what contributes to a particular cost, e.g. breakdown the monthly payouts by line of service.

# Compare across member dimensions

Member dimensions are those that slice the member population. Geography is a good example. In California you may have 1M members in your plan while you only have 10K members in North Dakota.

Other member dimensions are time (members come in and out of your plan over time), as well as any dimension that defines a member, such as gender, age, and any flags that characterize a member, e.g. a past diagnosis. All these dimensions come from your membership and member tables.

By calculating measures and dividing them by the number of members concerned, you are able to do a *fair comparison* of your measure.

# Compare across other dimensions

If you use other dimensions, such as service line, you are now breaking up your measure and are looking at the *contribution* of a service line towards the overall PMPM value.

# Calculating PMPM

Calculating PMPM numbers always end up being a ratio. It's the ratio of your aggregate measure, divided by the number of member-month in your population and timeframe.

	SUM( Cost ) / SUM( MM )

How we get to this point is the object of parts 2 and 3 of this article.

# Methods

There are essentially two methods to achieve PMPM calculations in Tableau.

1. Blending
2. Data prep + LODs

The first method is the natural one. You pull costs from one datasource. You pull MM counts from another datasource. You blend them together.

The second method requires some upfront work. Typically you will have to prep your data, join it in a special way into a single data source, and prepare the MM and measure PMPM calculations upfront. The benefit is that because it becomes a single datasource, it can be published back to Tableau Server and shared with others.
